Documentation for local kubernetes using k3d (#1181)
neicnordic/sensitive-data-archive: README.md

```sh
$ make test-sda
```

## Testing and developing the helm charts locally

> Developing and testing the helm charts (or other deployment manifests) requires an kubernetes environment. One of the most light weight distributions avilable is [k3d](https://k3d.io/stable/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developing and testing the Helm charts (or other deployment manifests) requires a Kubernetes environment. One of the most lightweight distributions available is [k3d](https://k3d.io/stable/).
```

### install k3d

The simplest way to install k3d is by using the official install script.

- wget:

```bash
wget -q -O - https://raw.githubusercontent.com/k3d-io/k3d/main/install.sh | bash
```

- curl:

```bash
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/k3d-io/k3d/main/install.sh | bash
```

Once installed a cluster named `test-cluster` can be created as such:

```sh
k3d cluster create test-cluster
```

> Or by using the `make k3d-create-cluster` command, creates a cluster named `k3s-default`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or by using the `make k3d-create-cluster` command, you can create a cluster named `k3s-default`.
```

> The new cluster's connection details will automatically be merged into your default kubeconfig and activated, the command below should show the created node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new cluster's connection details will automatically be merged into your default kubeconfig and activated. The command below should show the created node.
```

```sh
kubectl get nodes
```

Removing the cluster can be done using the `make k3d-delete-cluster` command or as shown below if a specific name is used during creation.

```sh
k3d cluster delete test-cluster
```

#### Install kubectl

If `kubectl` is not installed, run the following command to download the latest stable version. (substitue `linux/amd64` with `darwin/arm64` if you are using a Mac).

```sh
curl -sLO "https://dl.k8s.io/release/$(curl -L -s https://dl.k8s.io/release/stable.txt)/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl"
```

### Deploy the components

Deployment of the charts can be done as describe below in more detail, or by using the corresponding command in the [Makefile](./Makefile)

#### Makefile commands

> - make k3d-deploy-dependencies - bootstrap dependencies
> - make k3d-import-images - build and import images into the default cluster named `k3s-default`
> - make k3d-deploy-postgres - deploy the sda-db chart
> - make k3d-deploy-rabbitmq - deploy the sda-mq chart
> - make k3d-deploy-sda-s3 - deploy the sda-svc chart with S3 storage
> - make k3d-deploy-sda-posix - deploy the sda-svc chart with POSIX storage
> - make k3d-cleanup-all-deployments - Remove all deployed components and dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `make k3d-deploy-dependencies` - bootstrap dependencies
- `make k3d-import-images` - build and import images into the default cluster named `k3s-default`
- `make k3d-deploy-postgres` - deploy the sda-db chart without TLS
- `make k3d-deploy-rabbitmq` - deploy the sda-mq chart without TLS
- `make k3d-deploy-sda-s3` - deploy the sda-svc chart with S3 storage without TLS
- `make k3d-deploy-sda-posix` - deploy the sda-svc chart with POSIX storage without TLS
- `make k3d-cleanup-all-deployments` - Remove all deployed components and dependencies
```

#### Bootstrap the dependencies

```sh
bash .github/integration/scripts/charts/dependencies.sh local
```

#### Deploy the Sensitive Data Archive components

Start by building the required containers using the `make build-all` command, once that has completed the images can be imported to the cluster.

```sh
bash .github/integration/scripts/charts/import_local_images.sh <CLUTER_NAME>
```

The Postgres and RabbitMQ Needs to be deployed first, the bool at the end specifies if TLS should be enabled or not for the deployes services.  
Replace `sda-db` in the example below with the helmc hart that shuld be installed. (`sda-db` or `sda-mq`)

```sh
bash .github/integration/scripts/charts/deploy_charts.sh sda-db "$(date +%F)" false
```

Once the DB and MQ are installed the SDA stack can be installed, here the desired storage backend needs to specified as well (`posix` or `s3`)

```sh

> bash .github/integration/scripts/charts/deploy_charts.sh sda-db "$(date +%F)" false s3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bash .github/integration/scripts/charts/deploy_charts.sh sda-svc "$(date +%F)" false s3
```
